[Music]
welcome to background briefing I'm Ian
masters today we'll look at one subject
in the news or one subject that many
would hope isn't in the news but still
persists it's a story that has legs
perhaps because much of it was broken on
the internet which is a free form of
publication I'm talking about the Contra
cocaine in South Central Los Angeles
story today we'll be joined by Colin
brown who's a prominent local Los
Angeles defense attorney and he'll be
talking about his clients and they were
key to this story a group of Los Angeles
County sheriff's officers were arrested
for skimming drug profits from
confiscated raids they also took part in
the raid in 1986 homes of members of an
alleged drug-dealing ring that included
done it but demillo Blandon State
Senator Tom Hayden has written a letter
to Sherman blocked the sheriff of Los
Angeles in this letter he's asked in
this letters of dated December the 3rd
so he's expecting a senator Hayden
expecting a reply next week from Sherman
block but however the sheriff after
having said that there were no papers
associated with this raid available have
now reinvestigated this 1986 raid and
have turned up 3500 pages and quoting
from Senator Hayden's letter in light of
previous statements that no records were
recovered from the raid and a general
public suspicion regarding the saga
these documents may reveal answers to
Troublesome questions that will not go
away so be looking into those
troublesome questions we'll also be
joined by Robert Perry who is the editor
of the consortium for independent
journalism he is the reporter originally
when he was working for The Associated
Press AP he broke the around Congress
story and much of this story that is
persisted
in terms of the connection between South
Central Los Angeles and the Contras and
under the broad heading of CIA and drugs
which will be the subject for today
let's now go to Harlan Brown I'm
speaking with Harlan Brown as a
prominent Los Angeles defense attorney
and back in 1986 Harlan Brown there was
a raid conducted by the mages two unit
of the LA Sheriff's Office and you
handled the subsequent trial of the
defendants tell me how the case came to
you
well the Mike particular client was a
deputy sheriff that charted me when I
was a prosecutor and one of some of the
Manson family when I was a young
prosecutor so he came to me I figured I
owed him a defense but what happened was
that the sheriff's basically were
systematically stealing money from drug
dealers and they finally got caught by a
federal sting I think but it turned out
that well but when you're the defendant
Daniel Ghana came to you did he not say
that it's okay we've got a an type
defenses yeah the or not only Dan garner
but all the sheriffs assumed that the
federal government wouldn't come after
him for these relatively minor thefts
because they get under covered the
connection between the drug traffickers
and the CIA in the 1986 did search
I see so essentially they felt that they
had an immunity right a naively so I
mean this they even though they were
experienced police officers they just
didn't understand that the federal
government one arm can do one thing and
another arm won't know about it or just
simply deny it so they just thought that
they had them in a box which they
obviously did not but out of that raid
that the sheriff's did copy some of
these seized documents at the homes of
the milord bland on who is who is a
major figure in the story that was
broken by the San Jose Mercury News and
has subsequently been covered by other
okay they understood the significance of
it right immediately and they had the
foresight to copy some of the documents
because surely after the raid the
everything was taken away by some
federal officers who showed up at the
sheriff's station
they did maintain these documents and
they thought these would be almost give
immunity for subsequent prosecutions
these these ten pages that were
referring to now you gave copies to had
it what happened the LA Times got what
happened was that I tried to go public
with the idea that the of the CIA drug
connection as part of a defense the
prosecution the US government I asked
them for a letter saying it did not
occur and then I would put it into it
they simply put an s4 in order to gag me
I put the documents into the course
under seal and I give a copy to the LA
Times hoping that they would work on it
they never did anything with it
five of the pages disappeared ironically
but had simply subsequently been
recovered by the Sheriff's Department
those are the direct papers from Lister
listing various CIA agents and
connections now Aleister was one of the
people rated in in in in this by this
unit majors too you know the Sheriff's
Department in conjunction with the
Nicaraguan the drug dealer Danilo
Blandon Lister is a retired Laguna Beach
identified himself to the sheriff's as a
CIA operative they allowed him to call
to it in they recovered a number of
documents that would indicate that in
fact the the directions for the
sheriff's even before they met Lister
said that this was a contra operation
bringing drugs into in order to raise
money for the war in Nicaragua there was
no question about what was going on and
the sheriff's knew it and the FBI was
part of the 86 raid so I don't know why
people are all so surprised about this
connection well I believe that the FBI
documents concerning that 1986 raid when
the first break that the reporter from
the San Jose Mercury News Gary Webb
garden when he did afraid of information
search so they probably dug it up yeah
you know it's it's interesting because
when you listen to the denials right now
I mean you have to listen very carefully
to what's being said and
and the denials and I'm and I have a
very I didn't and I'm not an activist in
this area I just got in and once the
case was over I get out of it and then
just start out by various reporters and
my involvement you listen to the denials
there very carefully coughs like the CIA
inspector general say we do not have any
evidence that any CIA agents were
directly involved with drug dealing well
that of course is an admission because
what they're simply saying is what about
what happened of course is pretty clear
as you had Contras begin to deal in
drugs in order to circumvent the ban on
money you had CIA agents knowing about
it looking the other way or perhaps you
know assisting them indirectly that's
really the issue I don't think anyone
thinks that in Washington there was a a
decision made to sacrifice South Central
LA to save Nicaragua the question was
like Watergate did you get sucked in
afterwards and either a cover-up or
aiding them and I think it's pretty
clear it occurred indeed in the meeting
in in watts recently that where the the
now departing director of Central
Intelligence John Dodge in in in making
that statement there was actually a
preface he said at this time there's no
that was even more second spec than the
way you view we're dealing with some
other agency but this is called the
Central Intelligence Agency they're
supposed to keep track of what's going
on in the entire world and behind what
was then the Iron Curtain and we're only
asking on what was going on in your own
agency so it should not be a it should
not take weeks to figure out what they
were doing no I mean obviously and I
understand there's a reluctance to admit
now in 1996 what occurred in 86 but what
I may just say yes you know where it was
it was a cold war we were fighting it we
made some decisions and we allowed some
of our allies dealing drugs and we made
a decision we wanted to win the Cold War
it's a tough world out there you know we
did win the Cold War hey we used Nazi
rocket scientists to fight the Cold War
right after World War two no one denies
that now and those decisions were made
no one says we shouldn't have brought
Wernher von Braun over here and let him
go to the Russians
you know the decisions are made in war
were hot and people just admit it and
get on with it let me just provide the
audience again if I may I'm speaking
with Holland Brown who was a prominent
Los Angeles defense attorney who handled
a case involving a group of LA Sheriff's
Office's known as mages - they were anti
Narcotics squad and they raided a series
of homes in in Los Angeles in 1986 where
a lot of material relating to the
Contras was found they approached the
the main defendant Daniel Ghana the
sheriff's deputy approached you Harlan
Brown to defend him and basically saying
look we're okay the CIA is involved and
that proved to be naive on his part ten
pages however he had the presence of
mind to copy some of this confiscated
material and this ten pages you turned
it over Harlan Brown you turned over to
judge Edward rafidhi you also turned
over the same ten pages to a Los Angeles
Times reporter Victor morena right and
now we get to a new stage in this story
which is one of the reasons I'm talking
to you Harlan is I have a letter here
from State Senator Tom Hayden to Sherman
blocked the sheriff's of the County of
Los Angeles dated December the 3rd and
in this letter he he Tom Hayden says I
was pleased to see your recent statement
that the Los Angeles County Sheriff's
Department is reinvestigating the 1986
raid by an anti-drug unit on the homes
of members of an alleged drug-dealing
ring that included demillo bland on I am
concerned however that the interested
public is being refused access to some
3,500 pages of information that you have
announced your forwarding to
congressional investigator I urge you to
disclose these 300 and 3,500 pages to
the public in an accessible way now what
how come we see what concerns me
actually five of those pages are most
critical that I know about the the five
pages that we're missing those are the
written pages from Lister showing you
know actually they mentioned Iran they
mentioned a number of things
have the recovered copies have been
recovered by the Sheriff's Department
they've been shown to my client to
identified them as the same documents
and they're now in that packet given to
the federal government now they were
either fakes or they're genuine if you
know in other words it's possible that
the guy like Lister who tries to
disguise himself as a CIA agent or work
with the CIA and be it the dope dealer
on the side and use documents like this
to try to protect themselves or they're
genuine it should be easy to determine I
mean very quickly now the fact that
they're being withheld now when they've
been talked about so publicly indicates
to me that they may very well be genuine
and that they this does show a link that
actually it may involve the Iran to mmm
well now York you're a client Daniel
Gardiner he was shown these these papers
that resurfaced stuff
initially the Sheriff's Department said
that they had no record of this now and
then congresswoman Maxine Waters went
down to the sheriff's office and
demanded the release of papers now they
were they didn't have those but now they
do have them now I suspect the where
they came from is that some of they
share other sheriff's an addition to
garner had kept copies of these same
documents for the same reason the
Carnage's thinking it was installation
from a prosecution and they then turned
them over these sheriff's or copies over
these sheriff's investigators but now
they're critical to get at them I mean
if they're fakes let's expose him as
fakes and if they're genuine let's know
what's going on now there's another
issue my clients seized about 60 million
dollars worth of drug money here in Los
Angeles in a very in a relatively short
period of time that money was turned
over the federal government and the
testimony for trial was that the money
was wired out back to the drug cartel
you know as I told the the Senate the
house investigators all we have to do is
to trace that money if that money went
to the US Treasury there is no problem
because that's where that money should
have gone if that 60 million dollars
went somewhere else the question is why
why is it going to the drug cartel or
why is he going to offshore banks or why
is it buying guns in Europe
so it's a very simple thing follow the
money and they seem to want to they
refuse to do that that particular story
about where the money went may actually
be more important than this CIA drug
connection because what may have
happened is not the CIA but the main
federal government was rate was involved
in drug trafficking here using that
money for other purposes well it's also
worth noting Harlan Brown that that
freeway Rick Ross whose trial to some
extent brought this story out
he continued dealing for many years
after Blandon was arrested over here
his house was raided in this 1986 raid
right and he was blendin blandin
apparently was his main supplier what
happens of course is you you see the
thief the the feds the federal agencies
and the local sheriff's were grabbing
money in order to confiscate it to use
it for their own purposes particularly
federal government this was like off the
books money and what happens of course
if you have a successful one-year you've
wiped out the drug dealers haven't you
if you the only way you're almost like a
herdsman calling or heard the only way
to really make money is to only take
down so much of the money and allow the
other drug-dealing to continue because
that's what genuine generates the money
I think what happened this is that this
forfeiture laws that degenerated into
actual participation by the US
government and local officials and drug
dealing in the sense that they had to
allow the drugs to come in to generate
the money they had to allow a certain
number the dealers to operate they
wouldn't take down the money couriers
now you understand that in the 60
million dollars that my client seized
and the hundreds of money couriers that
they intercepted they never arrested one
drug courier now that is undisputed they
were under orders that if the drug
courier would find a piece of paper
saying that this is not my money they
were to be released now what do you
think happened what do you think the
drug dealers thought when these couriers
were showing up without sixty million
dollars mmm
they say there was a there was something
very nefarious here going on either
there was a unspoken alliance between
the US government and lon
horsemen and the drug dealers that you
know we let you operate so we can make
money whether there was a Express deal
now where did that 60 million dollars go
and why weren't these money couriers all
arrested those are very simple questions
and the answer that will read honest
answer will give us a definition of what
was going on here 10 years ago but
Harlan Brown you're a fairly experienced
defense attorney you're involved in the
Rodney King case you turned down the
Simpson case you know you know your way
around I mean would you be comfortable
having all of these documents that have
resurfaced that originally were not
supposed to exist
now this 3,500 pages involved are you
comfortable them going to the house
investigators given that the chairman of
the of the of the House Select Committee
on Intelligence Larry comm best he just
along with the CIA they just stripped a
State Department officer of his security
clearances because he told the truth to
the Congress so here you have the head
of the congressional committee punishing
as a government official for telling the
truth to the cop to the Congress so as
far as I'm concerned I'm sort of a
cynical only person I mean in a sense
look it took five years or for the
veterans white veterans basically or at
least a number of white veterans and
powerful conservative groups to dig out
of the government the fact that there
was a huge amount of physical injuries
done to the troops and the Iraqi war
took five years with tremendous
conservative pressure now what's the
chance that Maxine Waters and the
african-american activists in South
Central LA will able to dig this out of
the federal government probably close to
zero because though it happened it's not
really in the government's interest to
admit that it happened I mean someone
should make a decision that maybe it's
better just to let it come out all at
once and get it over with and to let
this thing drip drip drip for the next
ten years but you know given the
government's patter and I think they
will probably go into their denial mode
and of course the problem they have is
like they look at these five pages we're
talking about there is another shoe
couple sheriff's out there the probably
have copies of them so if they don't
make them public they're gonna get
public anyway so I just haven't you know
we'll just have to see how you know the
way it works itself out and the and
these five pages in this this ten pages
that that you have seen and that your
client Daniel Garner was recently shown
in order to verify that they were the
same as the original ten
they include diagrams of the roots of
the drug money the laundering process
outside the United States they I'm just
quoting here from Senator Hayden's
letter of December the third to Sherman
block the sheriff of the county of los
angeles and and i it senator Hayden told
me that he expects a reply this week
from from Sherman the documents I mean
look at what's the problem there either
genuine or they're fakes
let's find out I mean I I've seen the
documents I can't swear that they're
that they're genuine because you have to
know the background who the names belong
to to verify them or they're fakes
their lists are trying to use some guise
of being a CIA operative in order to
protect his drug dealing either way it's
a simple with the decision determination
let's find out whether they're fakes or
not if they're fakes then there's a
whole different cast if it's they're not
fake so then there's a direct CIA drug
link mmm-hmm and what any of these is
not gonna use so Hollen Brown when they
when they stamp secret no no no no these
were there for half of them were the
five pages were the pages that were not
did not disappear from judge Murphy T's
Court they were the the operative
directions for the search warrant which
the Sheriff's Department 86 at this is
the Contras bringing drugs in to support
the war this is an end that there was an
FBI were participated in these raids the
other five pages were the missing ones
which have now been recovered which were
handwritten documents recovered from
Lister mm-hmm and you and you don't have
any idea what the 3,500 pages are no uh
I mean probably most of its garbage if I
know the Sheriff's Department but you
know they're maybe three four hundred
pages of interesting pages they did
through everything for the kitchen sink
in there right but but the bottom line
is that these pages are it is the
intention as as of this moment that the
sheriff will send these on to the
congressional investigators which I
understand isn't that the House Select
Committee on Intelligence I think so you
know I had heard these sheriffs asked my
client to keep it secret that these
documents were recovered and he said
well at least have to tell my lawyer
which and so they asked him to keep it
secret for a week so we know he told me
and we basically kept a secret for a
week but I alerted the AG the
investigators who I had met with who
seem to be two Republicans and two
Democrats that came to my office to
question me about the this link I
alerted them sort of secretly cuz I
wanted to make sure that they knew the
documents were coming and they didn't
disappear mmm but the other than that it
wasn't made public what would these
investigators there and there's another
there's there are three investigations
this is a select House Committee on
Intelligence there was more
investigators and here all lawyers so
it's not Brum Brum which of the I mean I
don't know I mean I don't have my office
right now but they gave me their cards
but there's two Republicans and two
Democrats they work for the House Select
Committee right and and as I pointed out
they were working out Julian Dixon's
office right so it's hard to know but I
just I was there is also an in Justice
Department investigation headed up by
Bromwich Oh probably useless I mean in
1990 I gave this stuff this stuff was
available to the US Attorney's Office
here I specifically asked him just write
me a letter one page letter saying that
there's no connection and they refused
to do it and they basically were part of
the cover-up so the Justice Department
is particularly useless mm-hmm today
also the problem they're sending kids to
prison for life for small amounts of
crack cocaine so for them to come in and
now admit that the US government was
involved in the very drug trafficking
that they are maintaining is moralistic
position is somewhat inconsistent well
what do you expect since you've really
earlier a little cynical about matters
that may trip you know I mean the it
would on
the almost a miracle that the government
would just come out and tell the truth
and we'll get it over where that's
fairly inconsistent with their pattern
so I think it'll probably happen it'll
take us several years for the thing to
be finally drugged out and the problem
of course just like the OJ case this
thing is doing horrendous damage to the
race relations in this country because
the reluctance of the government and
this mealy-mouthed approach is just
exacerbating I mean if they were just
going to take a look at this is what
happened in 1986 the Contras got
involved in drug trafficking
we had CIA agency there looking the
other way or assisting it the truth is
is that the CIA or Contra drug
connection had it was a Smith school
amount of the crack that was coming in I
mean it did not cause the the crack
epidemic it would have happened anyway
it was a small part of it but their
failure to admit it is making it seem as
if they started it and and we were the
major portion of it mmm so what the
damage that's being done to the
government's credibility right now is
worse than the damage that would be done
by admitting the truth but who in the
government ever has the courage to make
that decision but what is your just as
an observer Harlan Brown what's your
sense of the reaction in the press in in
them it's been very interesting because
it's almost as if the Washington Post
was a running dog for the CIA the LA
Times tried to do a cover story
pooh-poohing me San Jose and if but if
you read the LA Times story very
carefully again it was just like the CIA
denials they kept 'miss phrasing the
issue the issue isn't whether the CIA in
Washington decided to bring drugs in
from Nicaragua or from the Central
America into LA the issue was whether
did the Contras begin to do it and at
the CIA look the other way or condone it
and they will not answer that question
because you can't answer the only answer
is of course it occurred so The Times I
think is embarrassed by their the fact
they had the story in 1990 and blew it
and then they're embarrassed by the fact
that the San Jose paper is the one who
broken so at the LA story was almost
like attack on the San Jose paper rather
than a
an investigation into the truth but did
did for example he since you and the
attorney for the sheriff's involved in
in in this raid that and everyone came
out and talked to me I mean it was
interesting really
report I never talk to any of the
reporters that did that story you know
one of the local guys called me and
asked me whether Dan garner would be
available which he couldn't write and be
right now but none of them came out and
to try to track it down and all it was
almost like they were afraid in you
notice nowhere in the story does it say
that I gave these two judgement CD into
one of their own reporters hmm does it
mean you would think that they would you
know at least would admit it and and and
these documents you guy were not
classified documents and there's no no
no no they were the the five pages were
the the commands to the to the sheriff's
in 1986 of which there is no question of
the authenticity and we and it shows
exactly what the sheriff's knew in 1986
which was this is the contras bringing
drugs into support the war in Nicaragua
at the FBI is party to those raids so
those were I mean that is it those were
those themselves are actually the most
devastating documents and these these
these are such wanted documents yeah
another one I mean so those are there's
not even a question of their
authenticity that's why the Lister
handwritten documents was just been
recovered or actually you know there is
could be some questions about their
authenticity but the papers that are in
existence have always shown that the
sheriff's and the FBI and 86 knew that
the Contras are bringing drugs into here
they knew it and they put it in the such
water that's right
well Harlan Brown I thank you very much
yes and I say I have this letter here a
copy of this letter dated December the
3rd last week to Sherman block by
Senator Tom Hayden asking for for the
these 3,500 pages to be released to the
public senator Hayden is the one who got
me involved and it's apparently one of
the year one of the more obscure
newspaper articles from 1990 used my
name
about the CIA and then he dug that out I
know some of his research people and
then I was able to pull the motion off
of my computer because of the and that's
we how we started to dig that's how
actually I had almost forgotten about I
just you know once the case was over I
went on to another case I'm not really a
political activist in any sense right
well I thank you very much because
doesn't say this this is the story that
that is not going away and I think names
yes maybe a lot of people would like it
to go away I think so yeah it's very
embarrassing I mean it's sort of like
being I mean I sort of analogize it's
like the Nazi stories after world war
two we made particular decisions about
using Nazis for our own purposes and we
when we took years to admit it and in a
way the government was at a war and I
don't really have a huge disagreement I
mean if they had said if they would just
come out said hey look guys we were
fighting for our lives that was we
perceived it we thought were losing
Central America and we made decisions to
use drugs to fight communists I mean I'm
not the person I'm not going to go crazy
over that I'm not gonna second-guess
people 10 years later right well it's
just it's just the 10 years later we
haven't we have a crack epidemic and
Sandinistas there are but you see the
interesting thing is that that's the
other thing is that I don't think this
cause the Krakken like the that belief
is only a result of the government sort
of disinformation that their turnout
trying to put out which then allows the
most wild speculation to gained credence
so the government's truly doing itself a
disservice with this kind of dishonesty
once again I thank you for joining us in
the census okay thank you thank you for
having me hello again I'm Ian Masterson
are just speaking then with Harlan Brown
has a prominent Los Angeles defense
attorney and he was the attorney for the
sheriff's the leader of the sheriffs
group that derated these houses back in
1986 that uncovered these documents and
as he mentioned he handed over copies to
a federal judge into the Los Angeles
Times back at the in 1990 and this case
has been reinvestigated by Sheriff
Sherman block and on December the 3rd of
last week
Senator Tom Hayden sent a letter to
Sherman Bloch asking that these these
3,500 pages that had resurfaced in this
new investigation be handed over to the
public rather than sent on to Washington
to the House Select Committee on
Intelligence I'm now speaking with
Robert Perry who is the editor of the
Consortium for independent journalism
and he's formerly reported with the
Associated Press and then he went on to
Newsweek and you're also the head of the
nation's investigative team Robert what
you didn't have the benefit listening to
to Harlan Brown but essentially he he's
sort of perplexed that this story has
been sitting around since 1990 and in
the instance has been revisited since
the Gary Webb articles still nobody has
talked to him what's your sense on on on
this disconnect between the internet
between this reporter up in San Jose who
broke this story and the rest of the
media that seemed to be quite hostile
towards her well I think it goes back as
a history to this story like there often
is the and in the way you have to go
back to the beginning of the 1980s when
the Reagan administration made such an
effort on behalf of the Contras the
Nicaraguan Contras and in the effort to
overthrow the Sandinista government of
Nicaragua and as the Reagan
administration internally described it
in there we know in not we know other
documents on some of their what they
call public diplomacy the idea was to
glue white hats on the Contras and to
glue black hats on the Sandinistas
through kind of public to public
relations techniques so whenever the
Contras would come under scrutiny for
human rights violations or any any kinds
of political problems the Reagan
administration would try to clean them
up discredit the witnesses attack the
reporters who might be digging out the
stories try to intimidate Congress if
they were looking into these areas and
that became the name of the game so when
the Contra drug story first came came
onto the scene and
December of 85 when when Brian Barger
and I wrote the piece for The Associated
Press that was that was the way the
Reagan administration responded it was
trying to at that point get more money
for the Contras more military aid the
CIA had been stopped by Congress from
being involved with the Contras for a
year or two at that point and the Reagan
administration wanted to bring the CIA
back in if you remember Oliver North was
sort of running the program in the
interim so the idea was how can you
discredit these allegations it was the
idea should have been I think how can
you stop these crimes from going forward
that is the importation of cocaine into
into the United States but instead the
Reagan administration thought it was
most important to just stop the story in
its tracks so there were a number of
Lies told then there were efforts to
discredit Senator John Kerry when he
tried to investigate this issue in 86
and as he continued his effort through
the spring of 89 he was under constant
criticism in during much of this period
the washington press corps having been
bludgeoned over the Contras for a number
of years swung more and more interline
with the Reagan administration position
the Washington Post in The New York
Times joined the editorial support for
the Contras by the mid to late 80s and
we saw we saw a consensus build in
Washington for the Contras even as the
evidence of serious criminal wrongdoing
was coming out and of course the
iran-contra scandal breaks in the fall
of 86 and many of those problems arms
Export Control violations obstruction of
justice and so forth became known in a
certain a certain way through the
hearings and investigations but always
there was the effort to contain the
damage to protect the Contras so
Washington has sort of dealt with this
issue it's been a very bitter almost
personal controversy inside the beltway
for you for a decade now and the people
who won that battle were the people who
wanted to protect the Contras who went
along with the PR schemes the reporters
in
investigators who tried to tell the
truth were largely pushed aside
discredited they lost jobs and they've
been subjected to a lot of ridicule so
that was where the game ended really
let's say after the Noriega trial where
more of this even came out but was still
rough was still basically ignored by the
washington press corps then Gary Webb in
the San Jose Mercury News come bouncing
along in 1996 and put this story out
about the effects of the Contra drug
trafficking or at least some of the
effects of Contra drug trafficking in
Los Angeles and they put the information
out on the on the internet which is
considered kind of a challenge to the
Washington news media for its for
dominance of what is to be believed in
this country so it had many it had many
red flags attached to it and the
Washington news media
first of all tried to ignore it they
just sustained this story but then after
that didn't work and then the black
community was very engaged and very
upset and there was a controversy a
controversy building around the story
itself then the Washington news media
first The Washington Post and The New
York Times in the LA Times the big media
just landed on it attacked it blasted it
out of the water if you will
tried to find anything wrong with it
they could to discredit the the larger
question which was that the that the
Contras had been involved in drug
trafficking substantially and the
Washington news media had failed in its
responsibilities to the American people
to to warn them of that kind of problem
that is something the washington press
corps doesn't want to admit any more
than the government wants to admit that
that it had tolerated drug trafficking
by people tied to the Contra movement
well Perry had but let's just try and
figure out what what's going on here
what since when is the press being flax
for the government and why why is that
this currently if I'm to accept what
you're saying why is this confluence of
interest between a government that may
be embarrassed by its actions and
press who's I mean what's the complicity
here what are they getting out of it
well basically the reporters who moved
ahead who got the good jobs were now the
bureau chiefs in Washington or the
deputy managing editor those mid-level
news executives got to where they got by
ignoring and putting down this story in
the 80s the reporters who looked at it
tried to examine it honestly were
punished and pushed out there was a
tremendous amount of pressure brought to
bear on the Washington press corps in
the 80s not to report critically of the
Contras it was Ronald Reagan's pet
initiative
it was madhva Ned described the Contras
as the moral equals of the founding
fathers if you remember so whenever any
negative publicity came out there were
teams set up at the State Department
inside the NSC who would go and browbeat
editors browbeat correspondents there
was a case with the National Public
Radio when NPR put out a show about a
contra massacre of some farm workers and
the story was entirely accurate but it
led to a trip by the public diplomacy
team had by headed by Otto Reich at that
point over to NPR offices and they sat
down and basically browbeat members of
the NPR staff over there and because the
government had some control over the NPR
funding the foreign editor whose in Paul
Allen was ousted people were losing jobs
over over their efforts to tell the
truth about these issues and that and
that has a very telling effect on any
any community and it's in the Washington
press corps it's a relatively small
community so when you start seeing you
start seeing that happen and with the
level of nasty attacks that were being
directed from the conservative media
particularly against individual
reporters from the Washington Times from
the New Republic from the from the Wall
Street Journal editorial page etc etc
etc it became very hard to sustain
serious and and hard-hitting
investigations of the Contras and people
stopped
and having stopped or having been purged
from the process that left behind those
who who had actually survived because
they had not done their jobs and we and
we ended up seeing this among other
stories being falling through the cracks
so in essence you're saying that the
government is essentially promoting
people in the news media by by favoring
them and demoting people by disfavoring
them well it's not quite that simple I
mean but it's to understand how
Washington journalism works these days
it's a bit like that that kid's game
laser tag and if you you know that's
where you have like a gun that shoots
light and you have like a sensor on your
chest and and you can get once or twice
or a few times but at certain point the
buzzers go off and you're dead well
that's a bit like how it is and now when
you have all these groups accuracy in
media Brent Bozell is group The Wall
Street Journal editorial page American
Spectator just literally scores of
conservative publications when when when
when a reporter would write critically
about the Contras that reporter would
come under fierce attack and after a
while his editors would say hey listen
this isn't worth it we're taking too
many hits and people would stop or if
they didn't stop they wouldn't work
anymore
let me remind the audience again if I
may that I think it was Robert Perry who
is the editor of the Consortium for
independent journalism he was formerly
with The Associated Press from 1974 to
1985 with Newsweek from 1987 to 90 and
he's also now working for the nation
magazines investigative unit he's a head
of that and we're talking about going
back to the sort of the genesis of this
story of the iran-contra story in the
press and its evolution into this news
story about the Contra cocaine
connection in the South Central Los
Angeles and there's no question in my
mind Robert Perry about the about the
your assertion that the Reagan
administration had a highly
sophisticated damage control team out
there operating under the aegis of
public diplomacy in fact my former
partner in this
program who was previously the head of
the Los Angeles World Affairs Council he
went to the State Department in that
period as a deputy undersecretary of
state and that was his job and he quit
because he couldn't stand literally
couldn't live with himself lying about
the Contras so there's no question about
that it's just it's the other part of it
that I've said that I'm trying to pin
down is the extent to which it worked I
mean I would say the I would say in this
may differ from what people in the
operation may have felt but the public
diplomacy operation was highly
successful and was highly successful cuz
have isolated the handful of reporters
who were trying to tell the truth about
this area and elected them to a lot of
attacks let me ask you though about
didn't when you originally broke the
alley north around contra story you had
a hard time getting that one and it sort
of slipped out by mistake didn't know
the course all these stories were very
hard because they're only a few
organizations really pushing them
Associated Press where I was was doing a
lot of it because I was leading that
investigation the Miami Herald was doing
some very good work but the big papers
had were just avoiding this and that
some of that goes back to the experience
of Raymond Bonnar was a New York Times
correspondent in Central America who was
targeted for his reporting about death
squads and I'll Salvador and he was run
out of the New York Times and that sent
a chilling message right through the
press corps so by the time we got to the
8485 period when I was looking at Oliver
North's operation the news executives
knew this was a dangerous area to go
into but but I must say we were able to
push out very careful stories about
Oliver North then when we got to the
contra drug allegations which we
encountered in the fall of 85
Brian Barger and I did go down to Miami
and then down to Central America to
investigate this and came back with the
story we had information from the
contours from there from their backers
from DEA officials we had some
documentation from Central America
we had a good deal of information
already and it was a solid story at that
point but when and it went through the
editing process at the AP and was
cleared for approval we thought um so
when I sent it in to the general desk at
in Washington I popped up on a computer
for the for the bureau chief I mean he
took it into his office and made a final
call to New York where the AP is run and
and there were sudden they were suddenly
cold feet and he called me in and said
well I'm not sure we're gonna be able to
do this you'll have to you know do a lot
more reporting and so forth so on
however simultaneously the story had
also shown up on a computer for the
foreign desk which is another branch of
the AP and they were not aware of the
political problems that we're developing
around the story so they they simply
translated the story into Spanish and
moved it out on the Spanish language
wire so a couple days later someone
called Brian Barger who was standing
next to me and saying gee it was a great
story you guys had on contra drugs and
Barger just went very pale and said what
are you talking about and it turned out
that we discovered that there didn't
this in a sense a mistake made and then
AP had AZ redouble our efforts and I
think the next day we ran the story out
on the National wires for the AP let me
just remind the audience again if I may
that I'm speaking with Robert Peary who
is the editor of the Consortium for
independent journalism Pete Berg's
original iran-contra story when he was
working for The Associated Press back in
1985 and he subsequently worked for
Newsweek and he's now with with the
Nation magazines investigative unit and
we're talking about the story that won't
go away although there does seem to be a
considerable constituency that would we
should go away it's interesting yeah the
previous guest Harlan Brown basically
thinks the government is really going to
be eventually embarrassed by this and by
by this is a drip drip drip of
information and by these denials that
they'll eventually they've making it
actually worse he made the analogy with
the the Gulf War veterans the government
denied there are any problems and of
course subsequent to that they've had to
admit there's a lot more people affected
and now they've admitting it
that the pages of field reports from
those particular days when the Iraqi
bunkers were blown up of gone missing
but he also rather Perry brought out
something that I thought was pretty
extraordinary he thought was a much
harder lead for a journalist to follow
up on that is that the sheriff's unit
out here that were raided blendin's
house and other houses and of course the
the FBI reports on those raids became
the first lead I think of when a
substantial leads that Gary Webb got
when he got a freedom of information
search back he said that these sheriff's
who were his clients they were skimming
there's no question about that he said
but they basically confiscated sixty
million dollars here locally and he says
in court s to me that that money was
supposedly wired back to the drug
cartels and he feels that somebody ought
to look into whether in fact that
confiscated money went into the US
Treasury or went somewhere else well it
sounds like an interesting story I think
the there there are a lot of interesting
leads on this the problem has been that
the the atmosphere in which they're
pursued is so poisonous 'men Washington
and I think people outside of Washington
do not quite grasp how nasty the city
can be on stories like this yeah I was
just going back I was on the West Coast
you know as you know for a few days last
week and I was I'd come back and
flipping through some of the Washington
Post The New York Times I hadn't stored
up here and there was a piece in The
Washington Post Style section which is
sort of the chic section which sort of
helps set the pecking order in
Washington and and there was a long
piece about bad information and how
dangerous that is and it included Gary
Webb story as a good example of bad
information it must be must protect
ourselves from and it was all done in
this kind of ridiculing tone which is
very intimidating for people in
Washington no one wants to be laughed at
in a place like this so it's very hard
to get editors to pursue it and it's
very hard I think even in Congress for
Congress people to put their careers on
the line and
being made fools out of so so people
haven't pursued it for those kinds of
reasons I think as much as any other
obviously the people in the government
that want to keep these things secret
try to encourage those those attitudes
and that fear but it's how it works the
world about what about Larry camp
combats the new Republican head of the
House Select Committee on Intelligence
he's the fellow that these 3,500 pages
of documents apparently been sent to by
Sheriff Locke and just on December the
3rd State Senator Tom Hayden wrote
Sherman block a letter it was from which
he's expecting a reply this coming week
urging him to hand these puppies pages
over to the public but if if they're
going to Larry combust he's he's just he
along with the CIA have fired or have
removed the the clearance of a State
Department officer frag nausea and for
telling the truth to the Congress I mean
I find it extraordinary that a member of
the United States Congress is punishing
a member of the government for telling
them the truth and going along with the
agency I mean I the fact that that
nunzio's career would be ruined without
a clearance gives you an idea of how
this game is played clearly the CIA has
a lot more power than people think in
Washington simply because it's the lure
of being in the know obviously if
congressmen wanted want to be nice to
them because they don't to be cut off
and if if government employees can't
function without access to their
information that would indicate to me
that they've got they've got some power
and I guess reporters that's even more
obvious if they can be fed stuff well we
make animated a careers right right well
in case of an NCO who was a State
Department official who blew the whistle
on on the Guatemalan death squad
activity which the CIA CIA had known
about and had been lying to Congress
about what it knew none CEO told a
member of Congress that he was being
misled
and and and that member of Congress bob
torricelli then went public with some of
this information and but the guy who
gets really nailed for this is none co
and what the message that sends in
Washington's as I say is a fairly small
tight community the message that sends
is that if you're a State Department
official wanting to sort of blow the
whistle on on some lying and deception
you do so at the risk of your entire
career your abilities to support your
family and journalists have learned
pretty much the same thing that if they
get targeted by the the in this case the
allies of the Reagan Bush
administration's who are particularly
Rosslyn Aysen when they come after you
with with all kinds of smear campaigns
pretty soon you you know you can't you
can't work in this town there's kind of
sort of an informal blacklist almost so
people are aware of that they're aware
of it as as anyone's aware of how
organizations really function internally
as opposed to maybe how they supposedly
function on the outside there's that
knowledge of what's dangerous what's
what hurts your career and it's clear to
people that they're trying to take on
the CIA over allegations like these drug
trafficking allegations by the Contras
is extremely hazardous to your career
health if you remember when when John
Kerry Senator John Kerry did a very good
investigation that investigation not
only exposed the contra drug trafficking
but it zeroed in on Manuel Noriega this
is back in 89 before our invasion of
Panama it also opened the door into the
BCCI scandal was a very important
investigation
when it came out as a report in April of
89 the Washington Post buried on a page
a 20 in a dismissive 700 word article by
my kiss cough that was a treatment
received in general at Newsweek John
Kerry was was was labeled a a Randy
conspiracy buff this is the kind of tone
and treatment that that people get when
they try to dig out the truth and so
after a while people realize hey this is
a
is awfully dangerous and if I want to
watch out for my career and making and
making a decent living I better not get
into those areas and I think that
explains a lot of why the washington
press corps has has attacked so harshly
the San Jose Mercury Peace and Gary Webb
personally even though nobody's actually
I mean obviously it's easy to refute the
thesis that the CIA peddle drugs on
street corners in South Central I which
of course the San Jose Mercury News
never said but no an awful lot of what
we're seeing here is you'll in a this
was repeated in this Val section piece I
mentioned it's this well the the San
Jose Mercury News implied that the that
the CIA peddle drugs on street corners
and that's so laughable and and so what
the media has been doing has been
setting up straw men in terms of
pretending to say what the San Jose
Mercury didn't say and then and then
bashing the heck out of that straw man
so III guess I guess I was a bit
surprised going back to your earlier
point about will this in a way come out
now I was a bit surprised at the
intensity of the Washington news media's
defense of of the Contras over the drug
trafficking even though if you read
those stories closely now the Washington
Post and other publications are saying
well yes the Contras were involved in
drug trafficking in the 1980s but the
the Fen Jose Mercury piece was
overstated that's kind of basically the
bottom line of what they say that then
didn't get interpreted to being that all
the story's been debunked and I and and
that has been so strong a message that
it's going to be very hard I think for
it for members of Congress for the for
people from California or from the
Washington area or for any anyone
outside the government and outside the
media to really demand clear firm
answers to these to these issues I think
it's possible and I think it certainly
would be a positive trend if that kind
of public pressure forced a final
admission at least at least a partial
admission of what's been going on for
the last
ten years and what's been covered up for
that long well I think it also indicates
at least to me Robert Peary a broader
issue and that is the extent to which
the mainstream powerful press the the
the the press that shapes opinions
that's the times the post in the LA
Times perhaps have gotten too
comfortable with the government over the
years which certainly for a a
conservative is appalling I mean that's
why I find people like Larry kumkum bass
to be so despicable because of the the
Republican conservative Republican
rhetoric about getting big government
off your back I mean here he is bending
over for the government and so I'm my
sense is that that you have to just say
thank God for the internet because it's
so pervasive and so free that it's an
alternative I think that it's not
surprising I don't know whether you've
read Jim fallows book about the press
but I've spoken him a few times about he
gay he certainly didn't want any friends
in Washington I mean he was making it
slightly different thesis and that is
you know that these big successful
journals have been essentially become
corrupt and here you have Cokie Roberts
getting huge lecture fees from from from
the medical industry while she
supposedly covering medical questions
etc well I certainly agree with those
points to I think the news media in
Washington has become corrupt has been
corrupted it's become corrupt in a
variety of ways and also it's become
it's become so entrenched and so
powerful people do not get voted out of
office from the media
you'll have your Sam Donaldson's and
Cokie Roberts and George wills from you
take it from the various sides of the
permitted political spectrum here in
Washington they're all they're all
hanging around and they make lots of
money giving these speeches so I
wouldn't dispute with what Jim fallows
says about that I agree with it but
there's also a more a more subtle if you
will
way in which this works and that is that
there can be such pressure placed
through personal ridic
you'll an attack on individual reporters
that they stop doing their jobs or
unable to do their jobs and I think that
was particularly a problem when Ronald
Reagan tried to to protect the Contras
through the public diplomacy and other
such efforts and it's also it raises
questions about Kenda can skin a
conservative dominated House of
Representatives and for that matter
Senate now can it take an honest look at
the Contras
because to look at the Contras honestly
and to really expose what they did would
also undermine Ronald Reagan's legacy
which as you saw if you watch the
Republican convention in San Diego the
Reagan legacy was a major part of what
the Republicans feel about themselves
Reagan was was much more of a star than
say George Bush who had a fairly much a
cameo appearance so you have sort of
take on an issue that might put that
legacy in a bad light is very hard for
conservative Republicans I suppose it's
with your wife Nancy Reagan running
around saying just say no and if if
history the worm of history turns and it
indicates that President Reagan may have
created the conditions in which the CIA
turned a blind eye to to a contra drug
dealing I suppose that is in the worse
than Jack Kennedy being found out to
have a active extracurricular sex life
you know right now and I think I think
the Republicans are we have seen the
effect on the Democrats from having the
Kennedy myth crumble and I think they
don't want that to happen with with with
with the sort of a legend of their
modern legend of a political life Ronald
Reagan well I thank you very much for
joining us in Los Angeles Robert Perry
and I hope to stay in touch thank you
bye hello again I'm Ian masters are just
speaking there Robert Perry who's the
editor of the Consortium for independent
journalism and he covered there he broke
the original iran-contra story for The
Associated Press back in 1985 Madeleine
Schwab is the board operator thank you
very much Madeline this program has
heard live every Sunday at 11:00 it's
rebroadcast
Monday at 2:00 p.m. I'll be back again
next Sunday at 11:00 have a very
pleasant week
[Music]